feat: CockroachDB example (#3500)
prisma/prisma-examples: databases/cockroachdb/README.md

# CockroachDB example

> This example shows how to connect Prisma to a CockroachDB database, create the database schema with raw SQL, use introspection to populate the Prisma schema and use [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/client) in a TypeScript script to read and write data in the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to:

- Connect Prisma to a CockroachDB database 
- Create the database schema with raw SQL 
- Populate the Prisma schema using [`prisma db pull`](https://www.prisma.io/docs/reference/api-reference/command-reference#db-pull)
- Read and write data to the database using [Prisma Client](https://www.prisma.io/client)
```

> > **Note:** CockroachDB support in Prisma is currently in **Preview** and doesn't support Prisma Migrate. For this reason, the database schema is created with raw SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** CockroachDB support in Prisma is currently in **Preview** and Prisma Migrate doesn't support it for now. For this reason, the database schema is created with raw SQL.
```

Reviewer 2: The sentence didn't make sense to me, so improved here

> > **Note:** CockroachDB support in Prisma is currently in **Preview** and doesn't support Prisma Migrate. For this reason, the database schema is created with raw SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** CockroachDB support in Prisma is currently in [**Preview**](https://www.prisma.io/docs/about/prisma/releases#preview) and doesn't support Prisma Migrate. For this reason, the database schema is created with raw SQL.
```

The example consists of two parts:

- `tests/prisma.test.ts`: Jest test (in TypeScript) with a variety of Prisma Client queries and assertions to showcase access patterns
- `src/script.ts`: Node.js script with queries similar to the ones in the test.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js installed.

> - [CockroachDB installed](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v21.2/install-cockroachdb.html) so you can run CockroachDB locally and use the CockroachDB client (interactive shell) .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [CockroachDB installed](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/install-cockroachdb.html) so you can run CockroachDB locally and use the CockroachDB client (interactive shell) .
```
`stable` points to same page as v21.2 but will be updated automatically on next release, so probably better to use that

> - [CockroachDB installed](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v21.2/install-cockroachdb.html) so you can run CockroachDB locally and use the CockroachDB client (interactive shell) .

Reviewer: Should we offer a Docker alternative here? The SQL Server and MongoDB examples use Docker 🤔

> > **Note:** You can also conect to a [free CockroachDB Serverless Cluster](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/create-a-serverless-cluster.html), however, this requires setting up a root certificate. For simplicity, this example relies on a local single-node CockroachDB server.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it's easier for people to use a local instance. Probably makes the example shorter.

I think it would make sense to document how to use the free cloud instance somewhere with the root certificate.

Author: Yeah good idea!

Author: Makes sense. I'll add instructions on using a free serverless instance

Author: Ok I added instructions on how to use CockroachDB Serverless in addition to Docker (instead of locally installing CockroachDB)

> > **Note:** You can also conect to a [free CockroachDB Serverless Cluster](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/create-a-serverless-cluster.html), however, this requires setting up a root certificate. For simplicity, this example relies on a local single-node CockroachDB server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** You can also connect to a [free CockroachDB Serverless Cluster](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/create-a-serverless-cluster.html), however, this requires setting up a root certificate. For simplicity, this example relies on a local single-node CockroachDB server.
```

webui:               http://localhost:8080
sql:                 postgresql://root@localhost:26257/defaultdb?sslmode=disable
sql (JDBC):          jdbc:postgresql://localhost:26257/defaultdb?sslmode=disable&user=root
RPC client flags:    cockroach <client cmd> --host=localhost:26257 --insecure
logs:                /Users/daniel/workspace/prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb/cockroach-data/logs
temp dir:            /Users/daniel/workspace/prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb/cockroach-data/cockroach-temp960221969
external I/O path:   /Users/daniel/workspace/prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb/cockroach-data/extern
store[0]:            path=/Users/daniel/workspace/prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb/cockroach-data
storage engine:      pebble
status:              restarted pre-existing node
clusterID:           dfa695a0-22e5-4356-8132-449169688432
nodeID:              1
```

## 3. Create the database schema with the included SQL

You will create the database schema using the [`dbinit.sql`](./dbinit.sql) file included in the repository.

Run the following command from the `cockroachdb` folder:

```
cockroach sql --insecure -f dbinit.sql
```

> The script will create the `prisma` database and create three tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script will create a database called `prisma` and create three tables – `User`, `Post`, and `Comment`.
```

You should see the following output:

```
CREATE DATABASE
Time: 116ms
SET
Time: 83ms
CREATE TABLE
Time: 183ms
CREATE TABLE
Time: 524ms
CREATE TABLE
Time: 569m
```

## 4. Configure the database connection URL

Prisma will use the `DATABASE_URL` environment variable in `.env` in the `cockroachdb` folder to connect to the database.

Create the file:

```sh
touch .env
```

Then add the following line:

```

> DATABASE_URL=postgresql://root@localhost:26257/prisma?sslmode=disable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DATABASE_URL="postgresql://root@localhost:26257/prisma?sslmode=disable"
```

```

## 5. Introspect the database

In this step, you will use the `prisma db pull` command to introspect your database and populate the Prisma schema.

Run the following command:

```sh
npx prisma db pull
```

You should see the following output:

```
Environment variables loaded from .env
Prisma schema loaded from prisma/schema.prisma
Datasource "db": CockroachDB database "prisma", schema "public" at "localhost:26257"

Introspecting based on datasource defined in prisma/schema.prisma …

✔ Introspected 3 models and wrote them into prisma/schema.prisma in 334ms

Run prisma generate to generate Prisma Client.
```

If you open the Prisma schema (`prisma/schema.prisma`) you should see 3 models.

## 6. Rename relation fields in the Prisma schema

> Now that you have introspected your database, you will rename the relation fields in the Prisma schema so that its easier to access relations using the same field naming conventions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have introspected your database, rename the relation fields in the Prisma schema so that it's easier to access relations using the same field naming conventions.
```

What's "the same field naming conventions"? 🤔

Author: Adjusted it to Prisma naming conventions and added a link to https://www.prisma.io/docs/reference/api-reference/prisma-schema-reference#naming-conventions

> **Note:** [Prisma-level relation fields](https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-client/working-with-prismaclient/use-custom-model-and-field-names#renaming-relation-fields) (sometimes referred to as "virtual relation fields") only exist in the Prisma schema, but do not actually manifest in the underlying database. You can therefore name these fields whatever you want.

Open the Prisma schema and apply the following changes:

```diff
model Comment {
  id        String   @id(map: "primary") @default(dbgenerated("gen_random_uuid()")) @db.Uuid
  createdAt DateTime @default(now())

>   comment   String

Reviewer: I think we can rename `comment` to `content` instead.

Author: I prefer leaving it as `comment`, since that's what it is. 

Is there any particular reason to rename it to `content`?

Reviewer: It seems a little odd that the model and field have the same name

Author: Sounds reasonable! I updated the column to `content` and the tests.

  authorId  String   @db.Uuid
  postId    String   @db.Uuid

> -  Post        Post     @relation(fields: [postId], references: [id], map: "fk_postId_ref_Post")
> +  post      Post     @relation(fields: [postId], references: [id], map: "fk_postId_ref_Post")
> -  User        User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_writtenById_ref_User")
> +  author    User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_writtenById_ref_User")

Reviewer 3: formatting:
```suggestion
-  Post      Post     @relation(fields: [postId], references: [id], map: "fk_postId_ref_Post")
+  post      Post     @relation(fields: [postId], references: [id], map: "fk_postId_ref_Post")
-  User      User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_writtenById_ref_User")
+  author    User     @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_writtenById_ref_User")
```

}

model Post {
  id        String    @id(map: "primary") @default(dbgenerated("gen_random_uuid()")) @db.Uuid
  createdAt DateTime  @default(now())
  title     String
  content   String?
  published Boolean   @default(false)
  authorId  String    @db.Uuid
-  User      User      @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_authorId_ref_User")
+  author    User      @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id], map: "fk_authorId_ref_User")
-  Comment   Comment[]
+  comments  Comment[]
}

model User {
  id        String    @id(map: "primary") @default(dbgenerated("gen_random_uuid()")) @db.Uuid
  createdAt DateTime  @default(now())
  email     String    @unique
  name      String?
-  Comment   Comment[]
+  comments   Comment[]
-  Post      Post[]
+  posts      Post[]
}
```

## 7. Generate Prisma Client

> Now that your Prisma schema has been introspected, you will generate Prisma Client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that your Prisma schema has been populated, you will generate Prisma Client.
```

Alternative:

```suggestion
Now that your database has been introspected, you will generate Prisma Client.
```

> **Note:** CockroachDB support in Prisma is currently in [**Preview**](https://www.prisma.io/docs/about/prisma/releases#preview), and **Prisma Migrate isn't supported for now**. For this reason, you will create the database schema with raw SQL.

The example consists of two parts:

- `tests/prisma.test.ts`: Jest test (in TypeScript) with a variety of Prisma Client queries and assertions to showcase access patterns
- `src/script.ts`: Node.js script with queries similar to the ones in the test.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js installed.
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) installed

> **Note:** You can also connect to a [free CockroachDB Serverless Cluster](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/create-a-serverless-cluster.html). This requires [setting up a root certificate](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/connect-to-a-serverless-cluster.html#step-2-connect-to-your-cluster).

## 1. Download example & install dependencies

Clone this repository:

```
git clone git@github.com:prisma/prisma-examples.git --depth=1
```

Install npm dependencies:

```
cd prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb
npm install

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion(GH doesn't render the content as it's suppose to when there are backticks):

Download this example:

```
curl https://codeload.github.com/prisma/prisma-examples/tar.gz/latest | tar -xz --strip=2 prisma-examples-latest/databases/cockroachdb
```

Install npm dependencies:

```
cd cockroachdb
npm install
```

<details>
<summary><strong>Alternative:</strong>Clone this repository</summary>

Clone this repository: 

```
git clone git@github.com:prisma/prisma-examples.git --depth=1
```

Install npm dependencies:

```
cd prisma-examples/databases/cockroachdb
npm install
```
</details>
